{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww16880\viewh8560\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Auger\
- How to perform the Arriaga decomposition \'97 worked analysis in Excel and also SAS and Stata code\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Arriaga papers\
- How to perform the decomposition\
\
Harper - JAMA\
- Perform the decomposition of the overall gap during the 80s and 90s. \
\
Harper - Health Affairs\
- The original paper that we are extending\
\
Williams, David (sociologist)\
- Provide a flavor for how some people think about the structural determinants of black and white health\
-Some points:\
	-Three leading causes of death: heart attack, cancer, and stroke. Related to chronic illnesses of hypertension, diabetes, and obesity\
	-15 leading cause of death - homicide. Blacks have a 6 times higher rate that whites in 2000\
	-Death from heart disease is 30% higher for blacks than whites in 2000. Declined over time, but gap persists since decline was larger for blacks than for whites.\
	-Cancer rates for whites have been relatively stable over time, but increasing for blacks \'97 40% higher in 2000 than 1950. Colorectal, breast and prostate cancer increased for blacks but were stable or declined for whites. Blacks have a lower incidence of cancer, but a higher rate of cancer mortality, points to access and utilization and delay of services as a role.\
	-Risk factors/Predictors: SES (Education, income, and healthy behaviours, stress), Residential segregation - determines access to education and employment opportunities. Related to violence because segregation creates areas with high rates of poverty and small pools of employable and stably employed males. Medical Care - reduce levels of health insurance among blacks.Black victims of violence are less likely to receive timely medical care, including emergency transportation. \'93Systematic and pervasive racial differences in the quality of care\'94. Less likely to receive preventative, screening, diagnostic, treatment and rehab services for cancer. >> Blacks have higher cancer mortality rates despite lower annual incidence for women. The physicians treating blacks are less likely to be board certified and less able to provide high quality care or referrals to speciality care. No disparities in flu and pneumonia - use to be large disparities in the 1950s.\
Policy implications - address segregation, reduce the income gap, improve medical care, rethink health policy\
\
Kunitz, Steve \
- For historical perspective\
-I\'92ve read this. Some points:\
	-Black women undergo less breast cancer screening, have lower rates of repeat mammography, and fewer follow up visits for abnormalities. Also have more risk factors for breast cancer - higher breast density and more obesity.\
	-Increase in deaths related to Asthma for both groups, but higher for blacks. Related to enviro conditions and lower-quality primary care\
	-HIV/AIDS and diabetes are two causes of death that account for much of the diff between which and blacks in life expectancy.\
	-Hard to say how much of disparities is due to differences in access to full range of health care services. Differences in insurance explains some but not all of the differences. Other issues: racism of providers, patients lack of info.\
\
Mustillo\
- Last page has Stata code for measuring differences from poisson MLM\
\
Satcher, David (former Surgeon General)\
-I\'92ve read this.\
-The more public health perspective from former Surgeon General David Satcher. \
\
}